Vincent, hello.
Michael, Michael, we're back.
Awesome.
Awesome to be back with you.
Yeah.
This is almost the sequel to the last time you were on the show.
So, yeah, it's going to be fun.
Yeah, so sequel in this case, not the query language, like an actual sequel of events.
Yes.
Yeah.
You can correct me if I'm wrong, but I think what happened is you had me on a podcast a
that we were very enthusiastic about was about this tool called DiscCache.
And then we kind of came to the conclusion, well, we had to cap it off.
Maybe it's fun to do an episode on just DiscCache
since we're both pretty huge fans of it.
I think that's how we got here.
I think that is how we got here as well.
And we're going to dive into this.
Honestly, it's a pretty simple library called DiscCache,
but what it unlocks is really, really sweet.
And I'm going to talk about a lot of different angles.
Now, even though it's just been not that long since you were on the show, maybe just give us a quick intro of who you are.
Sure. Hi, my name is Vincent. I've done a bunch of data machine learning stuff, mainly in the past.
That's sort of what a lot of people know me from. These days, though, I work for a company called Marimo.
You might have heard from us. We make very modern Python notebooks.
We took some lessons from Jupyter and we take a new spin of it.
So that's my day to day. But I still like to write notebooks and do kind of fun little benchmarks.
and also stuff with LLMs.
And I've just noticed that for a lot of that work,
boy, disk cache is amazing.
And I also use it for web stuff.
And I think that's also what your use case is a little bit more of.
But yeah, like in Notebook land,
you also like to have a very good caching mechanism.
And on the Maremo side of things,
we are also working on different caching mechanisms,
which I might talk about in a bit.
But just for me, the bread and butter,
the thing I've used for years at this point is disk cache
whenever it comes to that territory.
Yeah, it's funny.
This was recommended to me for Python Bytes as a news item over there quite a while ago, like years ago.
And I'm like, oh, that's pretty interesting.
And then I saw you using it in the LLM Building Blocks course, and it just unlocked for me.
Like, oh, my.
Oh, this is something else.
And so since then, I've been doing a bunch with it, and I'm a big fan.
I've been on this, like trying to avoid complexity, but still getting really cool
responses, performance, et cetera, out of your apps.
And I think this, you know, this is a really nice way to add multi-process, super fast caching
to your app without involving more servers and more stuff that's got to get connected
and keep running and so on.
But before we get into the details of that,
maybe let's just talk about caching in general.
Like what types of caching is there?
You know, I sort of gave a little precursor there,
but yeah, dive into it.
So like in the course,
the main example that I remember talking about
was the one you've got this LLM
and you want to do some benchmarks.
And it might be the case that, I don't know,
using an LLM for let's say classification,
like some text goes in,
we got to know whether or not it's about a certain topic,
yes, no, or something like that.
then it would be really great if, suppose the same text came by for whatever reason,
that we don't run the query on the LLM again.
It's like wasted compute, wasted money.
So it'd be kind of nice if the same text goes in that we then say,
oh, we know what the answer to that thing is already.
We cached it, so here you can go back.
And that's the case when you're dealing with heavy compute ML systems.
But there's a similar situation that you might have, I guess,
with expensive SQL queries, or you want to reduce the load on a database somewhere.
Then having some sort of a caching layer that's able to say,
oh, you're querying for something, but I already know what it is.
Boom, we can send it back.
I think the classical thing you would do in Python
is you have this decorator in functools, I think, right?
The LRU underscore cache.
Yeah, exactly.
That's the hello world to that.
But the downside of that thing is that it's all in memory.
So if you were to reboot your Python process, you lose all that caching.
So that's why people historically, I think, resorted to,
I think Redis, I think, is the most well-known caching.
tool. It's the one I've always used. There's Memcache, I think. There's other tools. You
can use Postgres for some of this stuff as well. But recently, especially because disks
are just getting quicker and quicker, people have been looking at SQLite for this sort of
a thing as well. So that's, I think, the quickest summary and also sort of the entryway to how
I got started with disk cache.
Yeah. And so for this example that you highlight in the LM Building Blocks course,
it's not a conversation. It's like a one-shot situation, right? You come up, you say, I have
some code or some documents and I have a, almost like an API. I'm going to send that off to the
LLM and ask it, tell me X, Y, and Z about it. And sure, it's got some kind of temperature and it
won't always give an exactly the same answer, but you're willing to, you know, you're willing to
accept and answer. And at that point, like why ask it again and again and again, which it might take
seconds, it might cost money. Whereas if you just remember through caching somehow, you remember it,
it's like, boom, instant. Yeah. And it tends to come up a lot in when you're doing benchmarks,
for example. So you have this for loop, you want to go over your entire data set, try all these
different approaches. And if you've got a new approach, then you want that to run, of course.
But if you accidentally trigger an old approach, then you don't want to incur the cost of like,
going through all those different LLMs.
I should say, even if you just forget about LLMs,
let's just say machine learning in general,
let's say there's some sort of image classification thing
you're using in the cloud.
There also, you would say, file name goes in, that's an image.
And if the same file name goes in,
we don't want the expensive compute cost to happen either.
So it's definitely more general than LLMs,
but LLMs do feel like it's the zeitgeisty thing
to worry about at least.
I think for two reasons.
One, because they're just the topic du jour.
And two, because they're, I think, a part of computing that most people experience that is way slower than they're used to.
Yeah.
And especially if you have an attic somewhere and you're a dad and you want to do home lab stuff and you're playing with all these open source LLM models.
And you also learn that, yeah, they're fun to play with, but they also take a lot of time to compute things.
So then immediately you get the motivation to do it the right way.
Yeah, I built a couple of little utilities that talk to a local LLM.
I think it's the OpenAI OpenWeights one,
that 20 billion parameter one I have running on my Mac Mini,
and it's pretty good, a little bit slow,
but it's fine for what it's being used for.
And I use your disk cache technique on it,
and if I ask it the same question again, it's like, boom.
You don't need to wait 10 seconds.
Here's the answer.
Yeah.
But I guess from your perspective,
I think your main entry point to this domain
was a little bit more from the web dev perspective, right?
I suppose you're using it a lot
for preventing expensive queries to go to Postgres,
or I don't exactly know your backend.
You won't believe how optimized my website is.
There's not a single query that goes to Postgres
because they go to MongoDB.
I'm just kidding.
There you go.
No, but your point is totally valid.
Go into the database, right?
Now, I don't actually cache that many requests.
I don't avoid that many requests going to the database.
They're really quite quick, and so I'm OK with that.
But when you think about a feature-rich database,
feature-rich web app, there's just tons of these little edge
cases you're like, oh, we've got to do that thing.
And it's not a big deal, but we've
got to do it 500 times in a request.
Then it is kind of a thing.
So let me give you an example.
I'll give you some examples.
So for example, the good portions of the show notes on talkpython.fm are in Markdown.
I don't want to show people Markdown.
I want to show them HTML, right?
Oh, yeah.
So when a request comes in, it'll say any fragment of HTML that needs to be turned into Markdown
instead of just going, oh, let me process that.
It just goes, all right, what is the hash of this?
or some other indicator of the content.
And then I've already computed that and stored it in disk cache.
So here's the HTML result.
Another example is there's a little YouTube icon on each page.
And that's actually in the show notes,
but then the website parses the YouTube ID out
and then embeds it with an X.
There's a bunch of stuff going on there
to keep YouTube out of spying on my visitors.
But stuff happens, YouTube ID is used.
That could be parsed every time.
Or I can just say, this episode has this YouTube ID.
That information goes into a cache.
And because it's a disk cache sort of scenario,
like a file-based one, not an LRU cache,
it doesn't change the memory footprint.
And it's shared across processes.
So in the web world, it's really common to have a web garden
where you've got two or four processes
all being round-robin'd
from some web server manager thing.
If you don't somehow out-of-process that,
either Redis or SQLite or Database or something,
then all of those things are recreating that.
They can't reuse that.
So there's a lot of interesting components there.
I suppose your web deployment,
you have a big VM, I suppose,
and then there's multiple Docker containers running,
but they do all have access to the same volume
and that's how they access SQLite.
Bingo, yeah, exactly, exactly.
And how am I doing?
Yeah, so what I have done is in the Docker Compose file,
I have an external, this is also important for Docker.
So I have an external folder on a big hard drive
in the big VM that says, here's where all the caches go.
And then depending on which app,
it'll pick like a subdirectory it can go look at
or whatever.
that it's using.
And so that way, even if I do a complete rebuild of the Docker image,
it still retains its cache from version to version
and all that kind of business.
You could do that with a persistent volume as well,
but I've just decided you can go and inspect it a little easier
and see how big the cache is and stuff like that.
Okay, so we're going to get into the weeds of how disk cache works exactly,
but I'm triggered here because it sounds like you've done something clever there.
Because what you can do in DishCache is you can say,
look, here's a file that's SQLite,
and then it behaves like a dictionary, but it's persisted on disk.
But what I just heard you say is that you've got multiple caches.
So am I right to hear that, like,
oh, for some things that need to be cached,
let's say the YouTube things, that's a separate file,
and then all the markdown stuff, that's also a separate file,
and therefore if connections need to be made to either,
that's also kind of nicely split.
Is that also the design there?
Yeah, that is.
And actually, we're going to dive into all the details of how it works,
I'll just go-- to give people a little glimpse,
I'll go ahead and show--
I've got this whole admin back in here.
And I've got different caches for different purposes.
Because they're just SQLite files,
you can either say, give me the same one,
or you can say, this one is named something else,
and it has a different file name or different folder
or whatever.
So I've got one that stores things like that YouTube ID
I talked about in any markdown, any fragment of markdown
anywhere in the web app that it needs to say,
that needs to go to HTML.
Yeah, and it's like 8,000 items in that thing.
Yeah.
In this one, there's 8,970 items, which is 9 megs.
Right.
I mean, it's not huge, but it's not too bad.
And you can actually even see where it thinks it lives,
but that's not really where it lives because there's the volume redirects and stuff.
But I've also got stuff for directly about the episodes that it needs to pull back.
And then I do a lot of HTTP caching.
And one of the things that I think is really wrong with web development is people say,
well, that's like a stale image or that's a stale CSS file or JavaScript, you know,
all that kind of stuff.
So if you just do like super minor tricks and just put some kind of hash ID on the end
of your content, it will, and you teach your CDN or whatever that that's a different file
if it varies by query string, then you never, ever have to worry about stale content ever.
But computing that can be expensive, especially for remote stuff.
If it's like an S3 thing, but you still want to have it do that.
So I have a special cache for that.
And that's pretty complicated to build up because it's got to do almost 700 web requests
to figure out what those are.
But once they're done, it's blazing fast.
You don't have to do it again unless it changes.
Then it doesn't change much and so on.
So that's the way that I'm sort of using and appreciating disk cache.
Yeah, it works well in your setup because you've gone for the VM route.
I mean, if you go for something like Fly.io or maybe even DigitalOcean has a really,
I think it's a nice app service, but that all revolves around Docker containers
that spin up horizontally.
And I don't think those containers can be configured in such a way
that they share the volume.
So in that sense, you could still use disk cache,
but then each individual instance of the Docker container
would have its own cache, which still could work out.
Not going to be as well functional.
It's going to be better with your setup, though.
Yeah, absolutely.
I agree, though.
You could still do it.
Or you could go, I'll take the zen of what Vincent and Michael
are saying today, and I'll apply that to Postgres,
or I'll apply that to whatever data.
You could pull this off in a database.
You would just have to do more work.
Yeah.
I mean, I've had a couple of, I think it was like a Django conference talk I saw a while ago.
They also like raping about disk cache.
But like the merits of disk cache do depend a little bit on your deployment, though.
That is, I think, one observation.
Like in your setup, I can definitely imagine.
Interesting.
Yeah.
All right.
Well, I don't even think we properly introduced this thing yet.
So let's maybe go there.
Yeah.
Let's start there.
It's time.
Okay.
Yeah.
I guess like the simplest way I usually describe it, it really behaves like a dictionary,
except you persist the disk and under the hood is using SQLite.
I think that's the, it doesn't cover everything,
but you get quite close if that's the way it is.
I think there might be, you know,
I keep harping on this on the show,
but there are so many people that are new to Python
and programming these days.
Many, many of them, almost half of them.
I think it's worth pointing out just like, what is SQLite?
Like, why is it different than any other database?
Like, why have I been using the word database or SQLite
when SQLite is a database, right?
That's weird.
So I never really took a good databases course,
so I might be ruining the formalism of it.
But the main, like, for me at least,
the way I like to think about it is Postgres,
that's a thing I can run on a VM,
and then other Docker containers can connect to it
because it's running out of process.
There's some other process that has the database somewhere,
and I can connect to it.
And I think the main thing that makes SQLite different
is that, no, you got to run it on the same machine,
on the same process where your program is running.
And that's, I think, the main...
And there's all sorts of little details,
like how the data structures are used internally,
and SQLite doesn't have a lot of types.
There's lots of other differences.
I think that's the main one.
Unless, Michael, I forgot something.
MICHAEL LITER: Yeah, no, I think it's--
operationally, it's a separate thing that you have to run.
It has to have both--
it has to be secure, because if your data gets exposed--
MARK MANDEL: Oh, we're talking about--
for Postgres, is it?
Not for SQLite.
MICHAEL LITER: Yes, for Postgres.
Yes.
MARK MANDEL: It's running somewhere.
People can SSH in if you're not careful.
You've got to be mindful of passwords and all that stuff.
That's totally true.
Right.
And it can go down.
Like, it could just become unavailable because you've screwed up something or whatever, right?
It's a thing you have to manage in the complexity of running your app when it's like, well, it used to just be one thing I could run in a Docker container.
Well, now I've got different servers.
I've got to coordinate.
And there's firewalls.
And there's, like, it just takes it so much higher in terms of complexity that, like, SQLite is a file.
Yes.
You know what I mean?
I do want to maybe defend Postgres a little bit there
because one thing that's really nice and convenient
in terms of CI, CD, and deployments and all that,
oh, suppose you want to scale horizontally
and there's Docker containers running on the left
and there's this one Postgres thing running on the right.
I mean, you can't just turn on and off
all those Docker containers as you see fit.
They're just going to connect to the Postgres instance.
And I've done this trick for Calm Code a bunch of times
where I just switch cloud providers
because Postgres is running there
and I can just move the Docker containers
to another cloud provider
And it all works fine.
No migration necessary.
With SQLite, that aspect is a little bit more tricky.
You have to be a bit more mindful.
Although, I should mention, it might be worth a Google.
There's actually this one new cloud provider that's
very much Python focused.
It's called Plash, P-L-A dot S-H, I think.
Oh, this is new to me.
Yeah, so--
Wow, OK.
Look at this.
From dot P-Y to dot com in seconds.
Yeah, it's the Answer AI, Jeremy Howard and friends.
I don't know to what extent this is super production ready.
And SQLite, you've got to be mindful of the production aspect
for some reasons as well.
But one thing that is kind of cool about them
is they give you a persistent SQLite as a database
and a Python process that can just kind of attach to it.
And they just, in their mind,
that's the simplest way that a cloud provider should be.
They take a very opinionated approach.
So yeah, if you're interested in maybe running this as a web service,
Like migrations are a little bit tricky in that realm
because you do have to like download the entire data set,
do the migration, upload it again, I think,
if I recall correctly.
And for some apps, that's no big deal.
Others, that's a mega deal.
They're been so big about data.
So I'm not suggesting this is going to be for everything
and everyone, but I do think it's cool,
which is why I figured I'd mention it.
So that's like...
It's new to me.
I'm going to follow up with lightstream.io.
Have you seen this?
Yeah, that is also really neat.
so yeah so basically
what if you want to back up your SQLite
like how could you do that
oh it might be nice to do that with S3
and it's a you know
I think it's like the guy who made that thing
works at Fly.io he's doing a bunch of low level stuff
one thing about that open source package
is also really interesting by the way
is I think he refuses
PRs from the outside
like he just wants to have no distractions whatsoever
like he has a very interesting way of developing software
you can submit issues of course
I think if you scroll down
there used to be a notice that basically said
hey this is a
contribution guide
we welcome bug reports
this is a way where you can basically stream updates to S3
and the main observation there is
S3 is actually really cheap if all you do is push stuff into it
if you never pull it out
usually getting it out is the expensive bit of S3
so this is like pennies on the like pennies on the dollar for really decent backup and you can
also send it to like multiple you can send it to amazon and also to digital ocean if you like
yeah yeah because these days s3 is really a synonym for blob storage on almost any hosting
platform right like it used to be s3 might go to literally s3 at aws but now it's like or digital
ocean object store spaces or to you know you name it right they've all adopted the api kind of like
open AI's API.
Yeah, I will say it's a little bit awkward that you have to
that like, sometimes you go to a cloud provider and they say you
have to download a SDK from a competing cloud provider and then
you can connect to our cloud bucket.
I know. And it's usually Boto3 and Boto3 is it's, if you want
to cry because you're using a library, like Boto3 has a good
chance of being the first one to make you do it. It is so bad.
It's so not custom. It's not, it's not built with craft and
love. It's like auto-generated where you pass
these, like you pass this kind of
dictionary and then the other argument takes a separate
dictionary that relates back. It's just like,
could you give me a real API here?
I mean, the one thing I can appreciate
about Bodo that I do think is honest to mention is like
they do try to just maintain
it, like the backward compatibility of that thing
also means it can't move
in any direction as well. And I can't
like, there is this meme where Google
kills all of its products way too early and
Amazon's meme is that they kill them way too late
sometimes never.
so in that sense I can appreciate that they just try to keep Bodo
not necessarily as user friendly but they do keep it super stable
I get there's a balance there
I feel like we still haven't really introduced this cache
we kind of set the stage
so SQLite, super cool, how does it work under the hood?
well it's really just like a Python dictionary so you can say something like
hey, make a new cache and then you can do things like cache
square brackets, string name, equals and then whatever Python object you like
can go in. And Python
has this serialization
method called a pickle.
Serialization just means, well, you can persist it to
disk in some way, and then you
can sort of get it back into memory again.
And that's what disk cache
just uses under the hood. So in theory,
any Python object that you can think of
can go into disk cache.
The only sort of thing
to be mindful of is if you have like Python
version, if NumPy version
one in Python 3.6, and you're going
to inject a whole lot of that into disk cache,
don't expect those objects to serialize nicely back
if you're using Python 3.12 and NumPy version 2 or something like that.
Right, because pickle is almost an in-memory representation
of the thing and that may have evolved over time.
That's also a true statement about your own classes potentially.
Yeah, so if you're dealing with multiple Python versions
and multiple versions of different packages
there's like a little bit of a danger zone to be aware of there.
That said, for most of the stuff that I do
that's basically a non-issue.
But I do get this nice little object
that can just store stuff into SQLite
and can get it out.
And it's very general.
It's going to try to be clever about it.
Like if you give it an int,
it's going to actually store it as an int
and not use the pickle format.
So there's a couple of clever things that it can do.
And it's also really like a Python dictionary.
So you can do the square bracket thing.
You can also do the delete
and then cache square bracket thing
to delete a key from the cache.
Just like a Python dictionary,
you have the get method.
So you can say dot get key
And if it's missing, you can pass a default value.
So it's very much like a dictionary.
I think Bob's your uncle on that one.
Unless, Michael, I've forgotten something.
But I think that's the simplest way.
Yeah, pretty much.
Yeah, I think so.
The difference being it's not in memory.
It's stored to a file.
It happens-- it's not always a SQLite file.
But often, it is a SQLite file as its core foundation
that it's stored to.
So it gives you process restart ability
where it still remembers the stuff you cache.
It's not like LRU cache.
We've got to redo it every single time.
And I think-- I don't know where it is in the docs here,
but the thread safety bit of it and the cross-process safety
is really nice about--
is it persistent?
I've got this whole table here, things like, is it persistent?
Yes.
Is it thread safe?
Is it process safe?
Yes.
Like compared against other things like people might choose.
And that honestly, I think that is the other half of the magic.
Yeah.
So especially for your web stuff, I would say that that's the thing you really want.
And some of that, of course, is just SQLite itself.
Historically, SQL, like one reason why people always used to say like use Postgres, not SQLite has to do with precisely this concurrency stuff.
My impression is that SQLite is really good at reading, but writing can be slow if multiple processes do it.
Some of that, I think, is related to the disk as well.
I don't know to what extent that has changed.
But historically, at least, whenever I was doing Django,
hanging out at Django events, people always said,
I just use Postgres because it's better for the web thing.
But it is safe.
The SQLite might become slower, but it is thread safe.
Right.
They've thought a lot about in this thing about transactions,
concurrency, and basically dealing with that.
but it is ultimately for the most part still
steeple light underneath.
But the thing with a cache is
if you're writing it more than you're reading it,
you probably shouldn't have a cache.
Yeah.
That beats the purpose.
Exactly.
You can get no value if you're recreating it.
You're only probably just doing it overhead
and wasting memory or disk space.
So it's inherently a situation
where it's going to be pretty read heavy.
and SQLite is good at read-heavy scenarios.
And maybe it's also fair to say
the LRU cache that you get with basic Python,
also to maybe explain that one,
so the LRU cache is a little bit different
because you decorate a function with it
and then given the same inputs,
one output goes out,
you can kind of keep track of a dictionary
that's in memory.
If you don't have a lot of stuff
to keep in the back of your mind,
then maybe you don't have to write to disk.
So there's also maybe a reason
to just stick to caching mechanisms
that use Python memory
because I also think,
I would imagine it to be quicker too,
But that should be quicker.
It's just that if you're capped at memory,
then you might want to spill to disk,
and then disk cache becomes interesting too.
Right.
For example, you have literally zero serialization
deserialization.
What you put in LRU cache is the pointer to the object
that you're caching.
If you've got a class or a list that's part of the LRU cache.
The one thing that is good to mention
that's also a really nice feature of disk cache
is just like LRU cache has a decorator,
so you can decorate a function.
This cache also has that.
And it works kind of interestingly, too.
So when you decorate the function,
you do have to be a little bit careful if you use that.
But then this cache will--
I think it will hash the function name and the inputs
that you pass.
I don't know if it also hashes the contents of the function.
Like, if you change the function itself,
I don't know if this cache will actually put that
in a different slot, if that makes sense.
Yeah, you can say at cache memoize, which is the design pattern speak for just remember this.
Yeah.
It takes the arguments.
And then it has like the Fibonacci sequence, which is the classic example, of course.
And like there are some extra things you can set there as well.
So you can say things like, hey, I think you're able to, yeah, you're able to set the expiry.
So you can say things like I want to cache this, but only for the next five minutes or so,
which can make a lot of sense if you're doing like a front page kind of a thing.
so like the Reddit front page
or something like that
that updates but not every second
that probably updates like once every five minutes
or something like that
and then you do want to have something that's cached
but then after that you want the cache
to basically just reset
and that is something you can also control
with a few parameters here
right that's interesting
there's a couple good use cases that come to mind for me
like one if I put this on the function
that generated the RSS feed for Talk Python
I could just say every one minute
and then it might be a little bit expensive
to compute because it's got a pars, you know, 535 episodes or whatever.
But then for one minute, all the subsequent requests,
just here's the answer, here's the answer.
And then without me managing anything,
it will just automatically the next minute refresh itself
by the nature of how it works, right?
How much traffic do you get on that endpoint just roughly?
One terabyte of RSS a month.
Okay, gotcha.
Okay, but there you go.
Then just doing that once a minute instead of many times a minute
will be a huge cookie.
I would say it's probably more than one request a second.
And the response size of the RSS feed is over a meg.
And so it's a non-trivial amount of asking.
Yeah.
And then how do you fix that with a whole bunch of infrastructure?
No, with a decorator.
Exactly.
You pretty much summed up all the reasons why I'm so excited about this
because it's like you could do all of this complex stuff
or you could just literally, in such a simple way,
just not recompute it as often.
Here's the danger.
What if there's a race condition?
And oh my goodness, two of them sneak in.
You know what I mean?
Okay, so you've done a little bit of extra work
and you throw it away.
Who cares?
I want to use Redis now.
And Redis is cool, but I've never used it before.
Better buy a book.
Okay, no.
With this cache, if you...
I mean, I'm sure it won't solve everything,
but this, I make a bit of a joke by saying just use a decorator, but it's honestly that feeling
that this library really does give you. You can just use it as a decorator, which has a lot of
great use cases. You can just use it as a dictionary. So it still feels like you're writing Python.
It's just Python with one concern less. And that is the magic.
And it takes on so many of the cool aspects of these high-end servers like Postgres or Redis or
Valkey, Valkey sort of the shiny new Redis, right?
I'd actually love to do a Redis benchmark.
I haven't done that yet.
But one thing I do wonder with disks are getting so much faster.
Yes.
Right.
And so you can actually at some point wonder like how much faster is Redis really going to be
and how much money are you willing to spend on it?
Because if your cache is huge and it all has to go in memory in Redis,
it could be wrong, but Redis is fully in memory, I think, right?
I believe so.
There is a database aspect.
Redis is weird because it could be so many.
Redis is cool.
It can do a lot.
They do have, they actually have benchmarks here on.
Oh, there you go.
Compared against memcached and Redis.
And it has the get speed and the write speed.
And this is smaller is better.
Yeah, look at this.
Disc cache beats Redis.
And I imagine that's because of the network hop or something.
Yeah, exactly.
I bet it's the network, the network connection.
So if you're running it on the same machine,
would have a different number there.
Might be good to maybe caveat that.
Yeah, it might be.
I mean, but also that I think that,
I don't know when they ran this benchmark,
but they probably, I just checked on PyPI.
This project started in 2016.
So it might-
I bet this is 2016 data right here.
I know how these docs go.
Yeah, so like it could also be
that those are old disks comparing old memories, right?
So then this is one of those weird benchmarks.
You got to really run them every six months or so
for them to remain relevant.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, the new NVM, VVM, whatever,
disks, SSD disks are so fast.
And also, they're not memory.
And memory is expensive nowadays.
Yes, it is.
People want to build data centers with them, I've heard.
Yeah, yeah.
And on the cloud there, this is a totally,
this is another really interesting aspect to discuss.
Probably more of a web dev side of things.
But if you do LRU caches or even to a bigger degree, I run a whole separate server, even if it is just a Docker container that holds a bunch of this stuff in memory.
That's going to take more memory on your VM or your cloud deployment or whatever.
And if you just say, well, I have this 160 gig hard drive that's an NVVM high speed drive, like maybe I could just put a bunch of stuff there.
And you can really thin down your deployments, not just because it's not in memory in a cache somewhere, but if you're not having any form of cache, you might be able to dramatically lower how much compute you need and avoid the memory.
Like there's layers of how this could like shave off.
And again, it's one of those things of like, oh, I just, can I pay for disk instead?
Oh, that's a whole lot cheaper.
What else do I got to do?
You just got to write a decorator.
Yeah, I think I pay $5 for, I think I remember exactly.
but I pay something like $5 for 400 gigs of disc.
There you go.
Do you know how much 400 gigs of RAM will cost on the cloud?
Well, I mean.
More.
More than five.
There goes the college tuition.
Exactly.
Sorry, kids.
Yeah.
No, but like it's, and again, like I vividly remember when I started college,
people were always saying, oh, keep it in memory because it's way faster than disc.
But I think we've got to let a lot of that stuff just go.
Interesting idea.
Yeah, I agree though.
I think you're right.
But anyway, so far, we've mainly been discussing the mechanics of it.
But there's some bills and whistles I think we should maybe also mention.
The expiry definitely is one of them.
There's also first in, first out kinds of things that you can do.
So maybe if we could go back--
Yeah, there's a bunch of features actually there.
Like, what was it?
I think the expiry is interesting already.
Because if you do regular, say, LRU caching or something like that,
You have a natural, it's going to go away when the process restarts.
And that's going to happen eventually.
Even in a web app, you ship a new version,
you've got to restart the thing or something.
But when it goes to the disk, it starts to pile up, right?
That's why I have this little admin page that has like,
how big is this?
And a button to clear it.
In fairness, that can blow up to a lot of Palooza as well,
if you're not careful.
It is a concern.
Yeah, it is definitely a concern.
And so I think a big way to fix it,
like the expiry we already talked about,
why it's interesting for stale data.
You want it to just auto refresh.
But it's also just a safeguard of--
maybe we'll just recompute this once a month.
It's really quick and easy.
Yeah.
Maybe just don't let it linger forever.
I think what you can also do, though, if I'm not mistaken,
is I think you can also set a max key size.
So you can say, this particular disk cache
can only have 10,000 keys in it.
And use a first in, first out kind of a principle.
Right, or last accessed or number of times.
There's a bunch of metrics there, actually, for how that works.
Yeah, it's pretty interesting.
I've never had to fiddle around with them too much,
but it's one of those things where even if I don't need it right now,
it is just a relief to see that the feature is there
in case you might need it later.
Yeah, yeah, for sure.
Let me see if I can find out where that is.
I don't know, keep bouncing around the same spot.
I've got it, let's just talk through them.
So I think the tags and expiries are pretty interesting,
But then there's also, I think, something that surprised me
a little bit is these different kinds of caches.
So there's like a fan out cache.
Have you looked at these?
These are interesting.
I remember reading about, I've never used them,
but I do remember reading them.
So let me give you the quick rundown,
and then you'll understand instantly.
It's super quick.
So it uses sharding, which is a database term, right?
So sharding is like, if I've got a billion records,
and it's a challenge to put them all in the same database entry,
database table or server, I could actually have 10 servers and decide, well, okay, what we're going
to do is if it's a number of the ID of the user, if the first number is one, then they go into this
database. If it's two, then they go in that, right? So 2005 goes into the second database and so on.
So it does that as well. This is one of the things it does to try to avoid the issues of multiple
writers, I believe. So you're less likely to write to the same database, so it doesn't have to lock as
hard.
It's kind of what you do where you say, oh, I've got this for the YouTube link and I've
got this for the HTML markdown, except those are like, those are like different chunks because
of their use case.
But you can also imagine, well, I've got this long list of users, but I still want to benefit
from having multiple SQLite instances.
And I suppose that's when you use this, right?
Yeah, I think that is why.
So it says, it's built on top of cache, just cache fanout, automatically shards, automatically
you just said how many you want, it figures out what that means.
and it says while readers and writers don't block each other
writers block other writers therefore the shard
a sharded
a shard for every concurrent writer
suggested this will depend on your scenario default is
8 so that's pretty cool
yeah okay and
presumably internally does something like
hashing to figure out how to like
send it around the shards
right the keys themselves have to be hashable anyway
probably so just hashes the key
and then shards on like the first couple letters
or whatever
yeah this is cool so it avoids the
concurrency crashes the one
difference for me the reason I didn't choose fanout
cache is because I
want to be able to say I want to clear all the YouTube
IDs but I want to keep the really expensive to
compute hashes of the remote
like I want to be able to clear stuff if I really
have to by category
and I guess you could also do that with tags but I'm just not
that advanced
and also keep it simple right like and again it's
one of those things where it's oh it's nice to know that this
is in here even if you don't use it directly
I agree.
Yeah, yeah.
This is a really nice feature.
It is, and I probably will never in my life use it,
but it's really cool that it's like--
you know, it's one of those things about a library
when you're thinking about picking it.
It's like, OK, the core feature is great,
but if I outgrow it, what is my next step?
Do I have to completely switch to something really different
like Redis or Valkey?
Or do I just change the class I'm using?
I had that with this.
So I actually had that feeling a while ago.
We're going to get to my example I think a bit later.
it. I was using the Memoize
decorator to decorate a function
to properly cache that.
But the one issue I had
is an input to that function was a
progress bar. It's kind of a remote
specific thing. I wanted this one progress bar to update
from inside of this one function.
But the downside was that every
time I rerun the notebook, I make a new
progress bar object.
Oh, and that means that the input has a different
object going in. Right, so you never actually
hit the cache. So, oh my god, I'm never
hitting the cache. This is horrible.
Then it turns out the Memwise decorator also allows you to ignore a couple of the inputs of the function.
So you can't.
Oh, interesting.
Like ignore by keyword or something.
Keyword argument.
Precisely.
And there's a bunch of use cases for it.
And this was one.
And you can just imagine my relief after writing the entire notebook.
So then look at the docs and go, oh, sweet.
Solved.
Yeah, that's super sweet.
Yeah.
Okay.
I think there's right below this.
Yeah, there's a couple.
We can just go down this list here.
There's some cool ones.
Oh, Django.
So they have a legit Django cache.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Straight in.
Sweet.
Yeah, I recall that it was like a huge Django following for this thing.
Yeah, and I think this is part why, and when I first saw it,
the reason it got sent to me is somebody's like,
oh, this disk cache, Django cache,
is a really cool thing to just drop into Django.
And I'm like, that's cool.
I'm not using Django, but I admire it.
That's why I didn't really look into it
until I saw your use case outside of Django.
I'm like, oh, okay, I understand how much this can do.
So the Django dish cache says it uses the fan out cache,
which we just discussed with the sharding,
to provide a Django compatible cache interface.
And you just do that in your settings file.
And you just say the back end is disk cache.django cache.
And you give it a location.
Boom.
Off it goes, right?
So really, really nice.
Cool.
Yeah.
And it sounds like you've done more Django than me.
How does this sit with you?
I mean, to be very clear, I do think Django is really nice
and really mature.
I do sometimes have a bit of a love-hate relationship
with it because Django can go really, really deep.
And some of the configuration stuff
definitely can be a little bit in your face.
So the main thing I just want to observe
is doing everything manually inside of Django
can be very time consuming.
So it's definitely nice to know that someone took the effort
to make a proper Django plugin in the way that Django wants it.
That's definitely the things I appreciate here.
I've never really used this in a Django app, to be honest.
Yeah.
It has a lot of nice settings here.
You can set the number of shards, the timeout,
so in case there's a write or read contention,
it can deal with that,
or it can at least let you know you're failing.
It even has a size limit.
Does it say how you can configure what to cache and whatnot?
I've never really used caches in Django in general,
so I don't know if there's a general cache feature
in Django itself that it will just plug into?
I think there is a general cache feature in Django.
The Django people are screaming silently.
I apologize.
I know, I know.
But I'm pretty sure it's just a built-in Django cache functionality.
Exactly.
It just routes into this thing.
So instead of configuring Redis, you just feed it this and you're good.
That's the idea then.
Yes, exactly.
Exactly.
So there's more.
The next one, I have to rage against the machine.
I'm sure it's the way, but DQ, pronounced deck.
So I don't know.
For me, I still say DQ.
I don't say deck.
like it's spelled D-E-Q-U-E and I know a lot of computer science people just call that deck but
um disk cache dot dq or deck however you want to use it it provides there's there's a couple of
higher order data structures that like operate on what we talked about so far but to give you
data structure behavior right like what we talked about so far is sort of dictionary but not list or
order or any of that.
But this you can actually
do
go and add a thing.
How do we add one?
Anyway, you can say like pop left
over and over to get, I guess you
just add it. It's kind of like a queue.
Yeah, like a queue, exactly.
With the goal of taking stuff out of it
instead of into it.
But you don't normally think of a cache as doing that.
But it'd be a cool way actually to fan out work
across processes.
I was about to say, that's a really good
I think, I mean, there's people that have made,
I forget the name, what's the Python queuing system,
Salary.
So that one is also built in such a way that you can say,
oh, where do you have the list of jobs that still need doing?
And I think also Redis is used.
Yeah, right, Redis and Queue.
Yeah, exactly.
Or Rabbit and Queue as well.
But you can configure SQLite if you want to, though,
if I recall with those.
It's just that in this particular case,
if you don't want to use Salary,
You can still kind of roll your own by using this cache as well.
I'm assuming it uses the same pickle tricks,
so you can do general Python things
and if the process breaks for whatever reason,
you still have the jobs that need doing.
Yeah.
We're going to still have to-- we're still
going to have to talk about this serialization thing,
these pickles.
Yes.
Not yet.
Let's go through this list.
Let's go through this first before we get distracted,
because it's a deep--
so DEC--
I guess we'll go DEC.
deck provides an efficient and safe means for cross-thread cross-process communication like
you would never think you would get that out of a cache really but it's uh yeah exactly but you
would do work to do that right you would do like transactions and you would do sorting you would
figure out well what if there's contention i mean the fact that it's just kind of a pop it's pretty
nice yeah that's definitely nice no that's definitely true although one thing that makes
it easy in this case though is again it is all running in like one process so it's not like we've
SQLite running in one place and there's 16 Docker containers that can randomly interact with it.
That can though. Is that the case? Because it's because this cache itself is already cross process
safe. Like that's why I was so excited about it for the, but it has to be on the same machine
though. Like that's the, I do think, yes, it's gotta at least be accessible rush, right? That is true
because technically there's nothing that says you can't put the file anywhere. I think there's
mega performance issues and locking issues on, it says basically don't use it on network drives.
Yeah, so that's the thing.
Some of this is like--
OK, you can do the locking.
You can do all those things.
You can do it well.
But the practicality of the network overhead
is something that usually causes a lot of confuffle,
at least in my experience.
Yeah.
OK, another one is disk cache index,
which creates a mutable mapping and ordered dictionary.
So if you really want to lay into the dictionary side,
you can do that.
That one's-- transactions as well.
So you can actually-- it has sort of in-place updates
and other things you can do.
So you can say, I want to make sure
that I'm going to get two different things out of the cache.
And I want to make sure that they're not changed
while I'm doing that, right?
Just like you would with threading or something.
Yeah, so nothing can happen in between.
So they both have to come out at the same time.
So the two values that I get, they
both existed at the same time in the cache
at the point in time that I was retrieving it.
Yeah, exactly.
So just with cache.transact, and you just go to town on it.
That's pretty straightforward, right?
Yep.
Are there any more in here?
There's a bunch of recipes for barriers and throttling
and probably semaphore-like stuff,
but I don't really want to talk about.
But you touched on these eviction policies.
Here's where I was looking for.
There's these different ones here that are kind of cool.
Whoops.
Don't mean to go away.
Yeah.
So you can set a maximum to the cache.
I think you do that by number of items typically in it.
It could also be the case.
Key size or something, yeah.
Yeah, or like total disk size, maybe we should double check.
Actually, the default for the disk size is one gig.
Yeah, there you go.
There's already a built in one.
Yeah, which might catch people off guard.
Much of the stuff is cash, but not always.
I don't understand.
Like, oh, yeah, you gotta be a little bit mindful of that, I
suppose.
But the but the same default not to have it go to
infinity.
Agreed.
Yeah, I guess small screen on my side.
But like, yeah, last recently.
I'll read them out for you.
Yeah, so we got last recently stored as a default.
Every cache item records the time it was stored in the cache,
and that adds an index to that field, so it's nice and fast, which is cool.
There's some other ones that are more nuanced, like least recently used.
So not in terms of time, but we've got one that was accessed 100 times
and one that was accessed two times.
Even if the one that was accessed two times was just accessed,
that one's getting kicked out because it's not as useful.
I don't know. That's a pretty neat feature.
And then the one people would expect
is, I don't know,
maybe at least recently used.
LRU.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
And there's also pruning mechanisms, if I'm not mistaken.
There's all sorts of fun.
You can argue there are bells and whistles
until you need them.
And one thing I have always found is
every item that I see here,
you might not need it right now,
but for every item you see, you do plausibly go,
oh but that might be useful later down the line somewhere like the right like the transaction
thing where you retrieve two things at the same time i don't really have a use case for it but i
don't even know but but i can imagine that one might where the consistency really matters
yeah i can i could see using the fan out cash yeah definitely but probably probably not the
the transaction but you know i'm already talking to mongo db which doesn't have transactions
effectively.
Not really.
What about performance? Should we talk about your graphs?
You brought pictures.
Yes.
When you told me, hey, let's do an episode on
DiscCache, I told myself, okay,
I need to do some homework. I actually have to use it for something
real. It's a bit complex.
What we're going to try and do is
we're looking at a chart right now, and I'm going to explain
to Michael what it does. I'm going to try to
explain it in such a way, such that if you're not
watching but listening, that you're also going to be
fairly interested in what you're seeing.
And I'll link to the chart, of course, people can.
Yeah, so this is all running on GitHub pages.
And the charts that you see here definitely needed a bit of disk cache to make it less painful.
So what I've done is I've downloaded a Git repository.
What you're looking at right now is the Git repository for Marimo.
And then I just take a point in time and I say, okay, let's just see all the lines of code.
And then I take another point in time.
And then I basically just do kind of a Git blame to see if the line got changed in between.
So what you're looking at here is kind of a chart over time where it's basically like a bar chart, but it changes colors as time moves forward.
And the shape that you see is that things that happened early on, well, there's a nice thick slab, but it gets a little bit thinner and thinner as time moves forward because some of those lines of code got replaced.
But in the case of Marimo, you can see that most of the lines of code actually stay around
for a long time.
It's kind of like a smooth sedimentary layer every time we move over.
It's compressing a little over time.
The weight of the project has sort of compressed it.
So yeah, it's pretty interesting.
So that's pretty cool.
But you can also go to Django.
So there's a director on top.
Yeah, Django.
Oh, you can put this cache in here.
This is really different.
Yes.
What is this telling us?
So OK, so what you can see here is that at some point in time,
there's a huge shift in the sediment.
There's a lot of light sand and a lot of the dark sand goes away.
There's also a button that allows you to show the version number.
So I've-- yep, there you go.
There we go, yeah.
So you can see that right before a new version,
a bunch of changes got introduced, or like right after.
It's usually around the version number that you can see that shift.
Right, once the feature freeze is lifted,
some stuff comes in, PRs come in maybe or something.
Yes, and one other thing that's actually kind of fun,
if you go, there's this project called Psychot Lego
that you can also go ahead and select.
And folks...
I've heard a pretty cool guy maintains that, yeah.
Well, so the funny thing is,
you can see that there's a massive shift there at some point.
Okay.
That's when we got the new maintainer.
Are you on the purple or the green side?
So there's this dark blue sediment that sort of goes down massively at that point.
But in this case, the first thing he did is redid all the docs.
So we went from Sphinx to make docs.
And that's like a huge...
If you look at the lines of code that changed as a result, that's quite a lot.
But if we now start talking about how you make a chart like this,
you got to imagine like I take the start of the GitHub history.
I take the end of the GitHub history.
I sample like 100 points in between.
And then for every line in every file, I do a git blame.
I think Django is something like 300,000 lines of code.
I mean, that's a lot of fun.
So that thing took two hours and 15 minutes on my M4 Mac.
And if you go there, you can actually select it.
That was a chunky boy, is what I'll say.
Yeah, 550,000 lines.
There you go.
But you can see that there's one version change, I think,
where they made a bunch of changes.
And it could be that that might have been, again, because I checked the docs as well on Markdown files, it might have been like a big docs change.
But hopefully by just looking at this, you can kind of go like, oh, yeah, this is probably a notebook somewhere.
And there's like a huge like for loop that does threading and like tries to do as much in parallel as possible.
And there's a progress bar, right?
Yeah.
Now I see why you had this problem with the caching.
That's right.
So but yeah, but here's also where the threading kind of came in.
Because the moment you say this point in time, now do all the files, do the git blame, that's
definitely something that can happen in parallel.
But then for every file, for every point in time, you do want to have something in the
cache that says, OK, if I have to restart this notebook for whatever reason, that number
is just known.
Don't check it again.
Yeah.
Yeah, super interesting.
OK.
I wonder if this 4.0 in 2022, is that might be when they switched to async?
They started supporting async.
It could be docs as well.
I'm not sure.
Well, yeah.
So that's kind of the hard thing with some of these charts.
I could expand these charts by saying things like, okay, only the Python files, et cetera.
But the way that this is hosted, this is really using the disk as a cache because all these charts are Altair charts.
You can save them to disk, and then you can easily upload them to GitHub pages.
So I do everything in disk cache to make sure that if I, for whatever reason, the notebook fails, I don't have to sort of do anything fancy to get it back up.
But then once it's time to actually put it on the site, I could use disk cache to show the charts, but then I would need a server.
So actually using disk to actually just serve some files is also just a pretty fine and good idea.
There are some things on the Marimo side
where we are also hoping to maybe give better caching tools
to the library itself.
It's just that when I was doing this,
I actually found a bug in our caching layer,
so then I switched back to disk cache.
You know what?
Look, that's valuable.
It's maybe not the way you will find, but it's valuable.
One thing you learn is that caching is actually hard to get right.
Oh, it is.
It is.
It's very hard.
It's on par with naming things.
It is one of the two things that goes wrong.
Naming things, cache invalidation, and off by one errors.
Yes, exactly.
It's the middle one.
Dad jokes are amazing.
Anyway, so one thing about this repo, by the way,
this is all my, we're going to add a link to the show notes.
There is a notebook, so if you feel like adding your own project
that you want to just add, feel free to spend your compute resources
two and a half hours to add a popular project.
I would love to have that.
One thing I think will be cool with these sorts of charts
is to see what will change when LLMs kind of get into the mix.
Do we see more code shifts happen if more LLMs get used for these libraries?
Very interesting.
I don't know if more code, old code will get changed,
but they are verbose code writers, those things.
Yes.
So this, assuming we can do this over time
and we're going to start tracking this,
I'm calling this code archaeology.
I do think it will be an interesting chart.
as is, I think it's already quite interesting to see differences
between different projects. I think if you go to
sentence transformers, you can also see when the project
got moved from an academic lab to hugging
face. So there are interesting
things you can see with these charts.
But you are going through
every file, every line,
git blame, 100 times.
Yeah, a lot.
Oh, you got to do 100 times per
line as well? Well, so
the start of the project
with a git repository, and then to make
a chart like this, you got a sample over the entire timeline. And it is a bit cheeky, because
sometimes you can go like, okay, but there's like a character that changed because of a linter. And
then like, is that is that really a change? Does it really matter?
It's whoever decided to run, you know, format on the thing.
We're looking at the Django chart. It could also just be that black just got an update or something
like that. Right?
Yeah, exactly.
It's also possible.
It's very possible.
It's unlikely, but it's not impossible, let me say. But yeah, anyway.
Yeah, this was one of the benchmarks that I did with disk cache
that I thought was pretty amusing and pretty interesting.
But there's this one other feature that I think we should also talk about,
which is that if you want to,
disk cache actually lets you do the serialization yourself.
So normally, what it would do is it would say,
like, okay, let's do the pickle thing.
And it's a bit clever, right?
So if the thing you're storing is like an integer,
then it doesn't go through the whole pickle thing.
It just stores it as an integer.
There's these native types that SQLite has,
and then it's able to do something clever.
but as soon as it becomes like a custom class
or a list of weird things
then it's
I personally don't like
it pickling I would prefer that it makes
me do something I think it's weird
well so the thing is you can write
your own disk class and then what you can
do is you can pass set disk class
onto the disk cache itself
and I was just kind of wondering like when
might it make sense to do this sort of a thing
and if you go to the docs there's actually like a really good example
just right there which is
It's JSON.
Yeah.
Weird one.
I lost your example.
I'll get it back.
If you type disk, you'll find it.
So JSON has this interesting thing.
It is text, if you think about it.
But it's text that has a bit of structure.
And that means that there are these compression libraries
you can actually run on them.
And especially if you have a pattern that repeats itself,
let's say a list of users or something like that,
and there's always the user key, and there's always maybe
the email key, and those things just repeat themselves
all over the place.
then there is an opportunity to--
there's this library called zlib where you can just
take that string, you can compress it,
and then that compressed representation
could go into disk cache instead.
And yeah, I figured that sounds like a lot of fun.
You can just grab the implementation there.
So I have this notebooks repository where I have LLMs
just write fun little notebooks.
I always check the results, obviously, just to be clear on that.
But one thing that was, I think, pretty cool to see,
if you just do the normal data type and you pickle it,
then you get a certain size.
And if you just have a very short, normal Python dictionary basic thing,
then it's negligible.
You shouldn't use this JSON trick.
But the moment you get text heavy,
there's just a lot of text that you're inputting there
and there's some repetition of characters.
Or if you really do something that's highly compressible,
it is not unheard of to get 80%, 90% savings on your disk space, basically.
now there is a little bit of overhead because you were doing the compression and sort of
decompression but if you're doing text heavy stuff uh this is something that can actually save you a
whole bunch and i can imagine for llms this would also be like kind of a win okay so this json disk
not only does it serialize to and from json which i think is safer it can be a pain if you got date
times you gotta you gotta use or or json or something like that yeah yeah i think but then
it's using Zlib here. You know, I just actually did something like this for just something in my
database. It had nothing to do with caching, but these records are holding like tons of text for
something sort of tangential to the podcast. And I'm like, I don't really want to put 100k of text
that I'm not going to query against or search into the database. So I used Python's XZ implementation.
And like you said,
there's a bunch of compression algorithms you could use.
It was way fast. So I just store it as bytes now
and it's like a tenth the size. It's great.
So I guess this is the same but for the cache
backend, right? Yeah.
And I think, well, you can see, I think Zlib is being
used internally. Yeah. I mean, it's not XZ,
but it's the same idea. Yeah.
Exactly. And, you know,
there's always new compression algorithms. Like, feel
free to check whatever makes sense. But
the fact that you have
one very cool example to add on the docs
because you can just copy and paste it. A lot of people benefit from it.
But why stop here?
because this is something you can do for JSON.
What else can you do?
Before we move on, though, if I were writing this,
I would recommend using like OJSON,
microJSON or ORJSON or whatever,
some of the more high-performance versions right there.
Yeah, and I think ORJSON, I mean, performance is cool.
The reason I use ORJSON a lot more
has to do with the types that it supports.
So it can accept NumPy arrays, for example,
and just listifies it.
And I think it has a few things with dates as well
and just has a slightly better support for a few things.
Okay, good to know.
All right, where are we going?
What's next?
NumPy arrays.
Okay.
So a lot of people like to do things with embeddings nowadays.
So like texting goes in, some sort of array thing comes out,
and then hopefully if two texts are similar,
then the arrays are also similar,
so you can do all sorts of fun little lookups.
And I do a fair share of doing things with embeddings,
and embeddings are also not notoriously expensive to calculate,
but it's still pretty expensive to calculate.
Okay, but you can write your full Python thing in there.
So if you compare storing NumPy as bytes
compared to that to a pickle, it's actually even.
There's very little to gain there.
But one thing you could do is you could say,
well, let's maybe bring it down to float 16.
That's a thing you can do.
You can sort of say before we save it,
we actually make it just a little bit less accurate
on the numeric part of it,
But that'll save us a whole bunch of disk space.
So that's already coming home.
Well, you need it to be super precise
with its evolving calculations.
But then in the end, if you're not going to report the numbers
to great decimal places, maybe going down is good, yeah.
Yeah, it depends on the use case.
But typically, you could argue maybe a 1% difference in similarity
if we have 100x savings on disk.
That'll be kind of a win.
So one thing I was sort of focusing on is just this.
You can do things like, okay, come up with your own little weird data structure where you say like, okay, let's pretend we're going to quantize the whole thing.
So we're going to calculate the quantiles of the float values that it can take.
And we're going to take like basically 256 buckets.
We're going to store the scale.
We're going to store the mean.
And then we're going to store in what bucket the number was in.
And you can turn that into a string representation.
These things are pretty fun to write.
and yeah
and then you scroll down in your big notebook
and then you find this
there you
go, that's a retrieval time
I think I got like a
4x improvement in terms
of like disk space being saved
it was like a 1% similarity score that I had
to give up for doing things like this
mileage can vary of course but like
again these are fun things to sort of
start playing with because you have access to the
way that you write that down
so
That was also a fun little exercise.
MARK MANDEL: Yeah, could you save NumPy arrays
by just converting it to bytes?
There's probably some efficient--
GARY GENSLER: Yeah, well, yeah.
MARK MANDEL: You know what?
What about a Parquet file?
In-memory Parquet file, then you just say,
here's the value in bytes.
GARY GENSLER: So I tried the bytes thing
and compared it to the pickle thing,
and that was basically the same size.
MARK MANDEL: OK.
GARY GENSLER: That barely led to anything.
About the parquet one, I mean--
You do get compression.
Well, yeah, but I could be wrong on this one.
But I think parquet is optimized to be a disk representation.
And then once you want to have it in memory,
it becomes an arrow representation.
I see.
Yeah, probably.
So in that sense, what I would do is,
if you have something in arrow, you use disk cache
to make sure it's written as parquet.
But then you kind of have to know what you're doing
if you're going to make parquet files.
And also the benefit of a parquet file is that you have like one huge table.
Right, you can scan it, yeah.
Yeah, it's a columnar format.
So then if I were a column, boy, would I want to have all the rows in me.
So in that sense, what I would do instead is,
for whatever reason, you just have a lot of data.
It's still kind of a cache, but it makes more sense to store all of it
in like a huge parquet file.
In parquet, you can store partitions.
So you can say this one column that's partitioned,
a date would be a very typical thing to partition on.
And then if you point polars to parquet, but you say,
I only want to have this date, it can sort of do the forward
scan and only pick the rows that you're interested in.
And I would imagine that that would beat anything
we might do with this cache, especially if the table is big.
So you don't always want to cache stuff.
Like I said, I actually don't avoid hitting the Mongo database a lot for my projects because
it's like the response time is quick enough and I might as well.
So I want to take two little avenues here.
But the first one is, what about DuckDB?
I know at least on the data science side and the analytics side, DuckDB is really popular,
really well respected, really fast.
Maybe you don't even cache it.
Maybe you just use DuckDB as a thing.
How do you feel about that?
I mean, DuckDB does solve a very different problem
than SQLite or Postgres in a way.
So I don't believe, to name one thing,
I believe DuckDB does assume that everything under the hood is immutable.
So it will never be ACID compliant
because it doesn't necessarily have to be.
You can still insert rows if I'm not mistaken,
but the use case is just assumed to be analytical in general.
It's really designed to sort of fit that use case.
You can insert rows though.
So like--
I mean, you might be caching data science things
that you're only computing once.
Like, for example, your charts.
I mean, once you've computed that,
it's not going to change because it's historical.
I mean, I might want to rerun it a month later
or something like that.
That's something I might want to do.
And in that particular case, it would be cool
if the sampling is the same and I just
want to add one sample at the end that all those samples I had
before, that those are in a cache somewhere.
Or maybe you want faster, better resolution.
Instead of going 100, you're going to go to 1,000 points.
but you could do 10% less because those are done, right?
So stuff like that.
But then what you would never do with a cache
is do like a group by and then a mean, for example.
It's outgrown its use at that point.
That's for sure.
Yeah.
And if it were a part of it, then the docs would say so.
But like, no, so in my mind,
like DuckDB really just solves a different problem.
Similar to like general SQLite
also solves a different problem than this cache.
And also Postgres is also solving a slightly different problem.
Sure.
All right, fair.
yeah
no go ahead finish your thought
well I also really love Postgres I gotta say
the thing I really like about it is that it is
boring but in a good way software where like
I have a Postgres
thing running there and
whatever SSH
thing I need I can swap the cloud provider
and it'll just go ahead and still run without me having to
move the data or do any migration or anything like that
that is also just like a nice feeling
but it solves a different problem
yeah
These would very likely be used together instead of--
I mean, Postgres can be used instead of disk cache,
but disk cache definitely not instead of Postgres.
So the other angle I wanted to riff on,
have you riff on just a little bit,
is I think people, especially people who are maybe new to this idea
of caching, they can end up thinking, OK, I'm going to store stuff.
We talked a lot about, I get something back from the database.
I could store that in a cache so I don't have to query it again
or whatever.
And those are certainly good use cases.
But I think a lot of times an even better use case
is if you're going to get 20 rows back from a database,
do some Python and construct them along
with a little other information into some object.
And then that's really what you want to work with.
Store that constructed thing in the cache.
You know what I mean?
Like as far as you can go down the compute layer,
like don't just stop like, well, it comes back
from the database, so we cache it.
Like if there's a way to say it, like there's
a bunch of work after that, think about how you might
cache at that level.
Okay, I'm going to pitch you a dream then.
Imagine you have a Python notebook
and
you're running a cell, you're running a cell,
you're running a cell, and halfway the kernel dies
for whatever weird reason.
It'd be nice if I could just reboot the notebook
and it would just pick it up again and move further.
Because again, I'm picking something out of a database
and I'm doing something little with it and
processing, processing, processing.
But wouldn't it be nice if maybe every cell had a caching mechanism?
If only you had some influence over a company that did this kind of stuff.
But you can imagine these are things that we are thinking about.
And again, what I'm about to suggest is definitely a dream.
This is not something that works right now.
Don't pin me on this.
We're thinking out loud here.
You can also imagine this being super useful where an entire team can share the cache.
Yeah.
Right?
So if your colleague already calculated something, you don't have to recalculate it again.
There's all sorts of use cases like that as well.
But there may be, there are these moments
when you want to have very tight manual control
over what goes into the cache.
That makes a lot of sense, and it's great.
But there are also moments when you just really
don't want to think about it at all,
and you just want everything to be cached.
Could I just use this thing as a checkpoint?
I can autosave, sort of, as my code runs.
Yeah, that's cool.
Yeah, and again, doing this right is hard
because there's all sorts of weird Python types,
and I mentioned the progress bar thing.
And there's all sorts of things
that we've got to be mindful of here.
But if you're thinking about really
how would you use this in data science
when you fetch a little bit of data and deal with it,
to me, it is starting to feel more natural
to then think about cells in a notebook
and maybe cache on that level.
Yeah, that's pretty interesting.
Just sort of cascade them along
as a hash of the hashes of the prior cells.
Well, and this is where things become tricky
of course, because then, OK, I've got this one cell
and I change one function in it.
Oh, if you're going to cache on the entire cell,
everything has to rerun.
And then, oh, if you're not careful,
your cache is going to be huge.
So OK, how do you do this in a user-friendly way?
There's all sorts of-- it sounds easier than it is,
is the one thing I want to say.
Well, I think you've got a better chance with Marima
than with Jupyter, at least, because you have a dependency
graph.
So you can at least say, if this one is invalid,
that means the following three are also invalid.
You know, you sort of propagate it there.
Totally.
But I try to focus a little bit more on the user experience side of things.
And one thing I've really learned from the notebook with, like, the progress bar is just there were moments when I felt like, oh, I just want this entire thing to be automated.
Don't make me think about this.
And then there were moments where I thought, oh, it's really nice to have tight manual control.
How do I provide you with both?
That's quite tricky.
But it is a dream.
So that's something to keep in mind.
Yeah, maybe someday there'll be a turn on cash flow checkbox.
Something.
Yeah, or well, at least till then,
I do think having something that works on disk instead of memory
these days is also just a boon.
Right, so this works in data science notebooks.
It works in web apps.
It works in little TUIs.
It doesn't care.
It works with LLMs.
And like, if you have a kind of-- yeah, actually,
similar to your set up, like if you have multiple processes
web app running on one VM.
If you have one big VM that you share with your colleagues,
you can also just share the cache, actually.
MARK MANDEL: Yeah, that's true.
So there's no reason you can't just point the same file.
Yeah.
MARK MANDEL: Yeah, and especially if you're
doing big experiments like grid search results or stuff
like that, that you really don't want
to recalculate the big compute thing.
That's actually not too unreasonable.
MARK MANDEL: Yeah, that's cool.
Yeah, if you have a shared Jupyter server.
MARK MANDEL: Yeah, and a bunch of universities
have that, right?
MARK MANDEL: Yeah, exactly.
I don't want to go down this path because we're basically
out of time.
I don't want to respect your time.
However, I do think there's a whole interesting conversation to be had
about how do you choose the right key for what goes into the cache
because you can end up with staleness really easy if something changes.
But if you incorporate the right stuff,
you might never run into stale data problems
because, for example, I talked about the YouTube ID.
Basically, the cache key is something like episode, episode data, episode YouTube thing, colon, YouTube, colon, the hash of the show notes, right?
Something like that where there's no way that the show notes are going to change and I'll get the old data because guess what?
It's constructed out of the source, right?
Things like that.
There's probably a lot, especially like in your notebook side.
There's a lot to consider there, I think.
yeah I mean so
I remember this one thing with the course where
I still wanted it to be cached
but I wanted to have like text goes in
and then five responses from the LLM
go out and the way you solve that is you just
add another key but you have to
be mindful of the cache key and you can
use tuples by the way that's also something you can
totally use as a cache key
so that was easy to fix it's just that
you have to be mindful
I want to give a quick shout out to that
I want to leave
I don't want to leave on a sour note but I think
I think it's necessary to give this shout out or this like call this out rather is the way I should say it is I think this project is awesome.
You think it's awesome.
Honestly, I think it doesn't need really very much.
But if you look at last updated, if you look at the last updated date, it's really, it hasn't got a lot of attention in the last six months or something like that.
Yeah, if I look at PyPI, the last release was 2023, which, yeah, a year and a half ago.
Yeah, and it's okay.
I would like to say that it's okay for things to be done.
It doesn't have to, things don't have to change.
But there's also a decent amount of, like, conversations on the issues.
And they haven't, you know, like a couple days ago, actually, someone asked about this.
But, you know, the last changes, I believe the guy, Grant, who works on it, started working at OpenAI about the time changes stopped going on.
I'm not entirely sure.
I feel like I could be confused with that with another project.
So, Grant, if that's not true, I apologize.
But I think that it is.
I'm pretty sure that it is.
Do we have LinkedIn?
I mean, I am comfortable stating, let me put it this way.
Yes, my colleague might make a different caching mechanism,
and yes, I might use that at some point,
but at least for where I'm at right now,
this cache needs to break vividly in front of my face
for me to consider not using it
because it does feel like it's done in a really good way.
The main thing that needs to happen, I think, functionally
to make sure this doesn't get deprecated too badly
is just you've got to update the Python version.
When a new Python version comes out,
you've got to update PyPI to confirm,
like, okay, we do support this Python version.
But I mean, most of the, like, if you look at the area that needs to be covered, a lot of that has been covered by SQLite.
And that thing is definitely still being maintained.
Yeah, it's getting mega maintained.
That's right.
So I also don't see the problem.
I don't, I don't, I'm not going to not use it.
I just want to put it out there on the radar for people for whom my co-look is to go, oh, Michael and Vincent were so psyched.
And I started to use this.
And now I'm really disappointed because, you know, whatever, I saw this.
the only real doom scenario I can come up with is if SQLite made like a
breaking change. That's the only thing I can kind of,
but the odds of that seem very low. Yeah. And it's, it's on GitHub.
You can fork it. I forked it. Exactly. Exactly. So no, I'm,
I definitely am still super excited about it.
I just want to make sure that we put that out there.
I'd mentioned intended to talk about it sooner, but in the, in the conversation,
but you know what, we were just so excited. Yeah, no. So if,
if this is definitely in my top five favorite Python libraries outside of the
awesome yeah i've really really have gotten awesome results out of it as well
so remember the way we opened the show and you talked about this like on the
when we talked about the llm building block stuff on the previous time you were on the show it's like
oh we better not go too deep on this even though we're both so excited because it's going to derail
the show we're now one hour and 15 minutes into it we kind of cut ourselves off i think that was
accurate it's uh yeah i mean you get you get two dads making dad jokes and riffing on tools they
of like it's it's bound to like yeah bound to exceed a barbecue yes i know i wonder what would
happen if sometime we just removed the time limit just got real comfortable and just rift on something
it could be hours it'd be fun but maybe two hour live streams exist michael i know i've i've listened
to some podcasts that are over three hours i'm like how's this still going but you know what
yeah but uh but yeah but this is a good point point in time to put we're both excited that's
the summary. That is the summary.
And I think I'm going to let you have
the final word on this topic here.
Maybe speak to people just about
caching in general and just cache
in particular as we close it out.
I mean, I guess the main thing
that I learned with the whole caching thing
in the last couple of years, I always thought it was kind of
like a web thing. Like, oh, you know, front
page of Reddit, that thing has to be cached.
That's the way you think about it. Yeah, of course.
And thinking about it too much that way totally blocked
me from considering like, oh, but if you do stuff in notebooks
and data science land, then you need this as well.
And I think there's actually a little emerging discovery phenomenon happening where people
that do things with LLM at some point go like, "Oh, I need a cache."
And then, "Oh."
Yeah.
So that's the main thing I suppose I want to say.
Even if you're doing more data stuff, give this disk cache thing a try.
It's just good software.
Yeah.
It's so easy to adopt and try out.
You can throw it in there.
Just add a decorator.
Exactly.
See what you get.
All right.
Vincent, welcome.
for coming back. I really appreciate it.
Thanks for having me. Always good to talk to you.
See you next time
when we again find out there's a cool Python library.
Yeah, that's going to be
the three-hour episode.
Watch out, y'all.
Have a good one.
Later.